ParT 2 Processes
Chapter

Process Description
and Control
3.1

What Is a Process?
Background
Processes and Process Control Blocks

3.2

Process States
A Two-State Process Model
The Creation and Termination of Processes
A Five-State Model
Suspended Processes

3.3

Process Description
Operating System Control Structures
Process Control Structures

3.4

Process Control
Modes of Execution
Process Creation
Process Switching

3.5

Execution of the Operating System
Nonprocess Kernel
Execution within User Processes
Process-Based Operating System

3.6

UNIX SVR4 Process Management
Process States
Process Description
Process Control

3.7

Summary

3.8

Key Terms, Review Questions, and Problems

129

M03_STAL4290_09_GE_C03.indd 129

5/9/17 4:38 PM

130   Chapter 3 / Process Description and Control
Learning Objectives
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
• Define the term process and explain the relationship between processes and
process control blocks.
• Explain the concept of a process state and discuss the state transitions the
processes undergo.
• List and describe the purpose of the data structures and data structure
­elements used by an OS to manage processes.
• Assess the requirements for process control by the OS.
• Understand the issues involved in the execution of OS code.
• Describe the process management scheme for UNIX SVR4.

All multiprogramming operating systems, from single-user systems such as Windows
for end users to mainframe systems such as IBM’s mainframe operating system
z/OS which can support thousands of users, are built around the concept of the process. Most requirements that the OS must meet can be expressed with reference to
processes:
• The OS must interleave the execution of multiple processes, to maximize processor utilization while providing reasonable response time.
• The OS must allocate resources to processes in conformance with a specific
policy (e.g., certain functions or applications are of higher priority) while at the
same time avoiding deadlock.1
• The OS may be required to support interprocess communication and user creation of processes, both of which may aid in the structuring of applications.
We begin with an examination of the way in which the OS represents and
­controls processes. Then, the chapter discusses process states, which characterize the
behavior of processes. We will then look at the data structures that the OS uses to
­manage processes. These include data structures to represent the state of each ­process
and data structures that record other characteristics of processes that the OS needs
to achieve its objectives. Next, we will look at the ways in which the OS uses these
data structures to control process execution. Finally, we will discuss process management in UNIX SVR4. Chapter 4 will provide more modern examples of process
management.
This chapter occasionally refers to virtual memory. Much of the time, we can
ignore this concept in dealing with processes, but at certain points in the discussion, virtual memory considerations are pertinent. Virtual memory was previewed
in ­Chapter 2 and will be discussed in detail in Chapter 8.
1

Deadlock will be examined in Chapter 6. As a simple example, deadlock occurs if two processes need the
same two resources to continue and each has ownership of one. Unless some action is taken, each process
will wait indefinitely for the missing resource.

M03_STAL4290_09_GE_C03.indd 130

5/9/17 4:38 PM

3.1 / WHAT IS A PROCESS?   131

3.1 WHAT IS A PROCESS?
Background
Before defining the term process, it is useful to summarize some of the concepts
introduced in Chapters 1 and 2:
1. A computer platform consists of a collection of hardware resources, such as the
processor, main memory, I/O modules, timers, disk drives, and so on.
2. Computer applications are developed to perform some task. Typically, they
accept input from the outside world, perform some processing, and generate
output.
3. It is inefficient for applications to be written directly for a given hardware platform. The principal reasons for this are as follows:
a. Numerous applications can be developed for the same platform. Thus, it
makes sense to develop common routines for accessing the computer’s
resources.
b. The processor itself provides only limited support for multiprogramming.
Software is needed to manage the sharing of the processor and other
resources by multiple applications at the same time.
c. When multiple applications are active at the same time, it is necessary to
protect the data, I/O use, and other resource use of each application from
the others.
4. The OS was developed to provide a convenient, feature-rich, secure, and consistent interface for applications to use. The OS is a layer of software between the
applications and the computer hardware (see Figure 2.1) that supports applications and utilities.
5. We can think of the OS as providing a uniform, abstract representation of
resources that can be requested and accessed by applications. Resources include
main memory, network interfaces, file systems, and so on. Once the OS has created these resource abstractions for applications to use, it must also manage their
use. For example, an OS may permit resource sharing and resource protection.
Now that we have the concepts of applications, system software, and resources,
we are in a position to discuss how the OS can, in an orderly fashion, manage the
execution of applications such that:
• Resources are made available to multiple applications.
• The physical processor is switched among multiple applications so all will
appear to be progressing.
• The processor and I/O devices can be used efficiently.
The approach taken by all modern operating systems is to rely on a model in
which the execution of an application corresponds to the existence of one or more
processes.

M03_STAL4290_09_GE_C03.indd 131

5/9/17 4:38 PM

132   Chapter 3 / Process Description and Control
Processes and Process Control Blocks
Recall from Chapter 2 that we suggested several definitions of the term process,
including:
• A program in execution.
• An instance of a program running on a computer.
• The entity that can be assigned to and executed on a processor.
• A unit of activity characterized by the execution of a sequence of instructions,
a current state, and an associated set of system resources.
We can also think of a process as an entity that consists of a number of elements.
Two essential elements of a process are program code (which may be shared with
other processes that are executing the same program) and a set of data associated
with that code. Let us suppose the processor begins to execute this program code,
and we refer to this executing entity as a process. At any given point in time, while
the program is executing, this process can be uniquely characterized by a number of
elements, including the following:
• Identifier: A unique identifier associated with this process, to distinguish it from
all other processes.
• State: If the process is currently executing, it is in the running state.
• Priority: Priority level relative to other processes.
• Program counter: The address of the next instruction in the program to be
executed.
• Memory pointers: Include pointers to the program code and data associated
with this process, plus any memory blocks shared with other processes.
• Context data: These are data that are present in registers in the processor while
the process is executing.
• I/O status information: Includes outstanding I/O requests, I/O devices assigned
to this process, a list of files in use by the process, and so on.
• Accounting information: May include the amount of processor time and clock
time used, time limits, account numbers, and so on.
The information in the preceding list is stored in a data structure, typically
called a process control block (see Figure 3.1), that is created and managed by the
OS. The significant point about the process control block is that it contains sufficient
information so it is possible to interrupt a running process and later resume execution as if the interruption had not occurred. The process control block is the key tool
that enables the OS to support multiple processes and to provide for multiprocessing. When a process is interrupted, the current values of the program counter and
the processor registers (context data) are saved in the appropriate fields of the corresponding process control block, and the state of the process is changed to some
other value, such as blocked or ready (described subsequently). The OS is now free to
put some other process in the running state. The program counter and context data
for this process are loaded into the processor registers, and this process now begins
to execute.

M03_STAL4290_09_GE_C03.indd 132

5/9/17 4:38 PM

3.2 / PROCESS STATES   133
Identifier
State
Priority
Program counter
Memory pointers
Context data
I/O status
information
Accounting
information

Figure 3.1 Simplified Process Control Block

Thus, we can say that a process consists of program code and associated data
plus a process control block. For a single-processor computer, at any given time, at
most one process is executing and that process is in the running state.

3.2 PROCESS STATES
As just discussed, for a program to be executed, a process, or task, is created for
that program. From the processor’s point of view, it executes instructions from its
repertoire in some sequence dictated by the changing values in the program counter
register. Over time, the program counter may refer to code in different programs that
are part of different processes. From the point of view of an individual program, its
execution involves a sequence of instructions within that program.
We can characterize the behavior of an individual process by listing the
sequence of instructions that execute for that process. Such a listing is referred to as
a trace of the process. We can characterize behavior of the processor by showing how
the traces of the various processes are interleaved.
Let us consider a very simple example. Figure 3.2 shows a memory layout of three
processes. To simplify the discussion, we assume no use of virtual memory; thus all three
processes are represented by programs that are fully loaded in main memory. In addition, there is a small dispatcher program that switches the processor from one process

M03_STAL4290_09_GE_C03.indd 133

5/9/17 4:38 PM

134   Chapter 3 / Process Description and Control
Address
0
100

Main memory

Program counter
8000

Dispatcher
5000

Process A
8000

Process B
12000

Process C

Figure 3.2 Snapshot of Example Execution (Figure 3.4) at Instruction Cycle 13

5000
5001
5002
5003
5004
5005
5006

8000
8001
8002
8003

5007
5008
5009
5010
5011

12000
12001
12002
12003
12004
12005
12006
12007
12008
12009
12010
12011

(a) Trace of process A (b) Trace of process B   (c) Trace of process C
5000 = Starting address of program of process A
8000 = Starting address of program of process B
12000 = Starting address of program of process C
Figure 3.3 Traces of Processes of Figure 3.2

to another. Figure 3.3 shows the traces of each of the processes during the early part
of their execution. The first 12 instructions executed in processes A and C are shown.
Process B executes four instructions, and we assume the fourth instruction invokes an
I/O operation for which the process must wait.

M03_STAL4290_09_GE_C03.indd 134

5/9/17 4:38 PM

3.2 / PROCESS STATES   135

Now let us view these traces from the processor’s point of view. Figure 3.4 shows
the interleaved traces resulting from the first 52 instruction cycles (for convenience,
the instruction cycles are numbered). In this figure, the shaded areas represent code
executed by the dispatcher. The same sequence of instructions is executed by the
dispatcher in each instance because the same functionality of the dispatcher is being
executed. We assume the OS only allows a process to continue execution for a maximum of six instruction cycles, after which it is interrupted; this prevents any single
process from monopolizing processor time. As Figure 3.4 shows, the first six instructions of process A are executed, followed by a time-out and the execution of some

1
5000
2
5001
3
5002
4
5003
5
5004
6
5005
---------------------Time-out
7
100
8
101
9
102
10
]103
11
]104
12
105
13
8000
14
8001
15
8002
16
8003
---------------------I/O request
17
100
18
101
102
19
20
103
21
104
22
105
23
12000
24
12001
25
12002
26
12003

27
12004
28
12005
---------------------Time-out
29
100
30
101
31
102
32
103
33
104
34
105
35
5006
36
5007
37
5008
38
5009
39
5010
40
5011
---------------------Time-out
41
100
42
101
43
102
44
103
104
45
46
105
47
12006
48
12007
49
12008
50
12009
51
12010
52
12011
---------------------Time-out

100 = Starting address of dispatcher program
Shaded areas indicate execution of dispatcher process;
first and third columns count instruction cycles;
second and fourth columns show address of instruction being executed.
Figure 3.4

M03_STAL4290_09_GE_C03.indd 135

Combined Trace of Processes of Figure 3.2

5/9/17 4:38 PM

136   Chapter 3 / Process Description and Control
code in the dispatcher, which executes six instructions before turning control to process B.2 After four instructions are executed, process B requests an I/O action for
which it must wait. Therefore, the processor stops executing process B and moves on,
via the dispatcher, to process C. After a time-out, the processor moves back to process
A. When this process times out, process B is still waiting for the I/O operation to
complete, so the dispatcher moves on to process C again.

A Two-State Process Model
The operating system’s principal responsibility is controlling the execution of processes; this includes determining the interleaving pattern for execution and allocating
resources to processes. The first step in designing an OS to control processes is to
describe the behavior that we would like the processes to exhibit.
We can construct the simplest possible model by observing that, at any time,
a process is either being executed by a processor, or it isn’t. In this model, a process
may be in one of the two states: Running or Not Running, as shown in Figure 3.5a.
When the OS creates a new process, it creates a process control block for the process
and enters that process into the system in the Not Running state. The process exists,
is known to the OS, and is waiting for an opportunity to execute. From time to time,
the currently running process will be interrupted, and the dispatcher portion of the
OS will select some other process to run. The former process moves from the Running state to the Not Running state, and one of the other processes moves to the
Running state.
Dispatch

Enter

Not
running

Running

Exit

Pause
(a) State transition diagram

Queue
Enter

Dispatch

Processor

Exit

Pause
(b) Queueing diagram

Figure 3.5 Two-State Process Model

2

The small number of instructions executed for the processes and the dispatcher are unrealistically low;
they are used in this simplified example to clarify the discussion.

M03_STAL4290_09_GE_C03.indd 136

5/9/17 4:38 PM

3.2 / PROCESS STATES   137

From this simple model, we can already begin to appreciate some of the design
elements of the OS. Each process must be represented in some way so the OS can
keep track of it. That is, there must be some information relating to each process,
including current state and location in memory; this is the process control block.
Processes that are not running must be kept in some sort of queue, waiting their turn
to execute. Figure 3.5b suggests a structure. There is a single queue in which each
entry is a pointer to the process control block of a particular process. Alternatively,
the queue may consist of a linked list of data blocks, in which each block represents
one process. We will explore this latter implementation subsequently.
We can describe the behavior of the dispatcher in terms of this queueing
­diagram. A process that is interrupted is transferred to the queue of waiting processes. Alternatively, if the process has completed or aborted, it is discarded (exits
the ­system). In either case, the dispatcher takes another process from the queue to
execute.

The Creation and Termination of Processes
Before refining our simple two-state model, it will be useful to discuss the creation
and termination of processes; ultimately, and regardless of the model of process
behavior that is used, the life of a process is bounded by its creation and termination.
Process Creation When a new process is to be added to those currently being
managed, the OS builds the data structures used to manage the process, and allocates
address space in main memory to the process. We will describe these data structures
in Section 3.3. These actions constitute the creation of a new process.
Four common events lead to the creation of a process, as indicated in Table 3.1.
In a batch environment, a process is created in response to the submission of a job.
In an interactive environment, a process is created when a new user attempts to log
on. In both cases, the OS is responsible for the creation of the new process. An OS
may also create a process on behalf of an application. For example, if a user requests
that a file be printed, the OS can create a process that will manage the printing. The
requesting process can thus proceed independently of the time required to complete
the printing task.
Traditionally, the OS created all processes in a way that was transparent to the
user or application program, and this is still commonly found with many contemporary

Table 3.1

Reasons for Process Creation

New batch job

The OS is provided with a batch job control stream, usually on tape or
disk. When the OS is prepared to take on new work, it will read the next
sequence of job control commands.

Interactive log-on

A user at a terminal logs on to the system.

Created by OS to provide a service

The OS can create a process to perform a function on behalf of a user
program, without the user having to wait (e.g., a process to control
printing).

Spawned by existing process

For purposes of modularity or to exploit parallelism, a user program can
dictate the creation of a number of processes.

M03_STAL4290_09_GE_C03.indd 137

5/9/17 4:38 PM

138   Chapter 3 / Process Description and Control
operating systems. However, it can be useful to allow one process to cause the creation of another. For example, an application process may generate another process
to receive data that the application is generating, and to organize those data into a
form suitable for later analysis. The new process runs in parallel to the original process and is activated from time to time when new data are available. This arrangement
can be very useful in structuring the application. As another example, a server process (e.g., print server, file server) may generate a new process for each request that
it handles. When the OS creates a process at the explicit request of another process,
the action is referred to as process spawning.
When one process spawns another, the former is referred to as the parent
process, and the spawned process is referred to as the child process. Typically, the
“related” processes need to communicate and cooperate with each other. Achieving
this cooperation is a difficult task for the programmer; this topic will be discussed in
Chapter 5.
Process Termination Table 3.2 summarizes typical reasons for process termination.
Any computer system must provide a means for a process to indicate its completion.
A batch job should include a Halt instruction or an explicit OS service call for
termination. In the former case, the Halt instruction will generate an interrupt to
alert the OS that a process has completed. For an interactive application, the action
of the user will indicate when the process is completed. For example, in a time-sharing
system, the process for a particular user is to be terminated when the user logs off or
turns off his or her terminal. On a personal computer or workstation, a user may quit
an application (e.g., word processing or spreadsheet). All of these actions ultimately
result in a service request to the OS to terminate the requesting process.
Additionally, a number of error and fault conditions can lead to the termination
of a process. Table 3.2 lists some of the more commonly recognized conditions.3
Finally, in some operating systems, a process may be terminated by the process
that created it, or when the parent process is itself terminated.

A Five-State Model
If all processes were always ready to execute, then the queueing discipline suggested
by Figure 3.5b would be effective. The queue is a first-in-first-out list and the processor operates in round-robin fashion on the available processes (each process in
the queue is given a certain amount of time, in turn, to execute and then returned
to the queue, unless blocked). However, even with the simple example that we have
described, this implementation is inadequate: Some processes in the Not Running
state are ready to execute, while others are blocked, waiting for an I/O operation
to complete. Thus, using a single queue, the dispatcher could not just select the
process at the oldest end of the queue. Rather, the dispatcher would have to scan
the list looking for the process that is not blocked and that has been in the queue
the longest.

3

A forgiving operating system might, in some cases, allow the user to recover from a fault without terminating the process. For example, if a user requests access to a file and that access is denied, the operating
system might simply inform the user that access is denied and allow the process to proceed.

M03_STAL4290_09_GE_C03.indd 138

5/9/17 4:38 PM

3.2 / PROCESS STATES   139
Table 3.2

Reasons for Process Termination

Normal completion

The process executes an OS service call to indicate that it has completed
running.

Time limit exceeded

The process has run longer than the specified total time limit. There are a
number of possibilities for the type of time that is measured. These include
total elapsed time (“wall clock time”), amount of time spent executing, and, in
the case of an interactive process, the amount of time since the user last provided any input.

Memory unavailable

The process requires more memory than the system can provide.

Bounds violation

The process tries to access a memory location that it is not allowed to access.

Protection error

The process attempts to use a resource such as a file that it is not allowed to
use, or it tries to use it in an improper fashion, such as writing to a read-only
file.

Arithmetic error

The process tries a prohibited computation (such as division by zero) or tries
to store numbers larger than the hardware can accommodate.

Time overrun

The process has waited longer than a specified maximum for a certain event
to occur.

I/O failure

An error occurs during input or output, such as inability to find a file, failure
to read or write after a specified maximum number of tries (when, for example, a defective area is encountered on a tape), or invalid operation (such as
reading from the line printer).

Invalid instruction

The process attempts to execute a nonexistent instruction (often a result of
branching into a data area and attempting to execute the data).

Privileged instruction

The process attempts to use an instruction reserved for the operating system.

Data misuse

A piece of data is of the wrong type or is not initialized.

Operator or OS intervention

For some reason, the operator or the operating system has terminated the process (e.g., if a deadlock exists).

Parent termination

When a parent terminates, the operating system may automatically terminate
all of the offspring of that parent.

Parent request

A parent process typically has the authority to terminate any of its offspring.

A more natural way to handle this situation is to split the Not Running state
into two states: Ready and Blocked. This is shown in Figure 3.6. For good measure,
we have added two additional states that will prove useful. The five states in this new
diagram are as follows:
1. Running: The process that is currently being executed. For this chapter, we will
assume a computer with a single processor, so at most, one process at a time
can be in this state.
2. Ready: A process that is prepared to execute when given the opportunity.
3. Blocked/Waiting:4 A process that cannot execute until some event occurs, such
as the completion of an I/O operation.

4
Waiting is a frequently used alternative term for Blocked as a process state. Generally, we will use Blocked,
but the terms are interchangeable.

M03_STAL4290_09_GE_C03.indd 139

5/9/17 4:38 PM

140   Chapter 3 / Process Description and Control
Admit

New

Dispatch
Ready

Running

Release

Exit

Time-out

Event
occurs

Event
wait

Blocked

Figure 3.6

Five-State Process Model

4. New: A process that has just been created but has not yet been admitted to the
pool of executable processes by the OS. Typically, a new process has not yet
been loaded into main memory, although its process control block has been
created.
5. Exit: A process that has been released from the pool of executable processes by
the OS, either because it halted or because it aborted for some reason.
The New and Exit states are useful constructs for process management. The
New state corresponds to a process that has just been defined. For example, if a new
user attempts to log on to a time-sharing system, or a new batch job is submitted for
execution, the OS can define a new process in two stages. First, the OS performs the
necessary housekeeping chores. An identifier is associated with the process. Any
tables that will be needed to manage the process are allocated and built. At this point,
the process is in the New state. This means that the OS has performed the necessary
actions to create the process, but has not committed itself to the execution of the
process. For example, the OS may limit the number of processes that may be in the
system for reasons of performance or main memory limitation. While a process is in
the new state, information concerning the process that is needed by the OS is maintained in control tables in main memory. However, the process itself is not in main
memory. That is, the code of the program to be executed is not in main memory, and
no space has been allocated for the data associated with that program. While the
process is in the New state, the program remains in secondary storage, typically disk
storage.5
Similarly, a process exits a system in two stages. First, a process is terminated
when it reaches a natural completion point, when it aborts due to an unrecoverable
error, or when another process with the appropriate authority causes the process to
abort. Termination moves the process to the Exit state. At this point, the process is

5

In the discussion in this paragraph, we ignore the concept of virtual memory. In systems that support virtual memory, when a process moves from New to Ready, its program code and data are loaded into virtual
memory. Virtual memory was briefly discussed in Chapter 2 and will be examined in detail in Chapter 8.

M03_STAL4290_09_GE_C03.indd 140

5/9/17 4:38 PM

3.2 / PROCESS STATES   141

no longer eligible for execution. The tables and other information associated with the
job are temporarily preserved by the OS, which provides time for auxiliary or support
programs to extract any needed information. For example, an accounting program
may need to record the processor time and other resources utilized by the process
for billing purposes. A utility program may need to extract information about the history of the process for purposes related to performance or utilization analysis. Once
these programs have extracted the needed information, the OS no longer needs to
maintain any data relating to the process, and the process is deleted from the system.
Figure 3.6 indicates the types of events that lead to each state transition for a
process; the possible transitions are as follows:
• Null u New: A new process is created to execute a program. This event occurs
for any of the reasons listed in Table 3.1.
• New u Ready: The OS will move a process from the New state to the Ready
state when it is prepared to take on an additional process. Most systems set
some limit based on the number of existing processes or the amount of virtual
memory committed to existing processes. This limit assures there are not so
many active processes as to degrade performance.
• Ready u Running: When it is time to select a process to run, the OS chooses
one of the processes in the Ready state. This is the job of the scheduler or dispatcher. Scheduling is explored in Part Four.
• Running u Exit: The currently running process is terminated by the OS if the
process indicates that it has completed or if it aborts. See Table 3.2.
• Running u Ready: The most common reason for this transition is that the
running process has reached the maximum allowable time for uninterrupted
execution; virtually all multiprogramming operating systems impose this type
of time discipline. There are several other alternative causes for this transition,
which are not implemented in all operating systems. Of particular importance
is the case in which the OS assigns different levels of priority to different processes. Suppose, for example, process A is running at a given priority level, and
process B, at a higher priority level, is blocked. If the OS learns that the event
upon which process B has been waiting has occurred, this moving B to a ready
state, then it can interrupt process A and dispatch process B. We say that the
OS has preempted process A.6 Finally, a process may voluntarily release control
of the processor. An example is a background process that periodically performs some accounting or maintenance function.
• Running u Blocked: A process is put in the Blocked state if it requests something for which it must wait. A request to the OS is usually in the form of a
system service call; that is, a call from the running program to a procedure that is
part of the operating system code. For example, a process may request a service
from the OS that the OS is not prepared to perform immediately. It can request

6

In general, the term preemption is defined to be the reclaiming of a resource from a process before the
process has finished using it. In this case, the resource is the processor itself. The process is executing and
could continue to execute, but is preempted so another process can be executed.

M03_STAL4290_09_GE_C03.indd 141

5/9/17 4:38 PM

142   Chapter 3 / Process Description and Control
a resource, such as a file or a shared section of virtual memory, that is not immediately available. Or the process may initiate an action, such as an I/O operation, that must be completed before the process can continue. When processes
communicate with each other, a process may be blocked when it is waiting for
another process to provide data, or waiting for a message from another process.
• Blocked u Ready: A process in the Blocked state is moved to the Ready state
when the event for which it has been waiting occurs.
• Ready u Exit: For clarity, this transition is not shown on the state diagram.
In some systems, a parent may terminate a child process at any time. Also,
if a parent terminates, all child processes associated with that parent may be
terminated.
• Blocked u Exit: The comments under the preceding item apply.
Returning to our simple example, Figure 3.7 shows the transition of each process among the states. Figure 3.8a suggests the way in which a queueing discipline
might be implemented with two queues: a Ready queue and a Blocked queue. As
each process is admitted to the system, it is placed in the Ready queue. When it is time
for the OS to choose another process to run, it selects one from the Ready queue. In
the absence of any priority scheme, this can be a simple first-in-first-out queue. When
a running process is removed from execution, it is either terminated or placed in the
Ready or Blocked queue, depending on the circumstances. Finally, when an event
occurs, any process in the Blocked queue that has been waiting on that event only is
moved to the Ready queue.
This latter arrangement means that, when an event occurs, the OS must scan the
entire blocked queue, searching for those processes waiting on that event. In a large
OS, there could be hundreds or even thousands of processes in that queue. Therefore,
it would be more efficient to have a number of queues, one for each event. Then, when
the event occurs, the entire list of processes in the appropriate queue can be moved
to the Ready state (see Figure 3.8b).

Process A
Process B
Process C
Dispatcher

0

5

10

5 Running

15

20

25

5 Ready

30

35

40

45

50

5 Blocked

Figure 3.7 Process States for the Trace of Figure 3.4

M03_STAL4290_09_GE_C03.indd 142

5/9/17 4:38 PM

3.2 / PROCESS STATES   143
Ready queue

Admit

Dispatch

Release
Processor

Time-out
Blocked queue

Event wait

Event
occurs

(a) Single blocked queue

Release

Ready queue

Admit

Dispatch

Processor

Time-out
Event 1 queue
Event 1 wait

Event 1
occurs
Event 2 queue
Event 2
occurs

Event 2 wait

Event n queue
Event n wait

Event n
occurs

(b) Multiple blocked queues

Figure 3.8

Queueing Model for Figure 3.6

One final refinement: If the dispatching of processes is dictated by a priority
scheme, then it would be convenient to have a number of Ready queues, one for each
priority level. The OS could then readily determine which is the highest-priority ready
process that has been waiting the longest.

Suspended Processes
The Need for Swapping The three principal states just described (Ready, Running,
and Blocked) provide a systematic way of modeling the behavior of processes and
guide the implementation of the OS. Some operating systems are constructed using
just these three states.
However, there is good justification for adding other states to the model. To
see the benefit of these new states, consider a system that does not employ virtual
memory. Each process to be executed must be loaded fully into main memory.
Thus, in Figure 3.8b, all of the processes in all of the queues must be resident in
main memory.

M03_STAL4290_09_GE_C03.indd 143

5/9/17 4:38 PM

144   Chapter 3 / Process Description and Control
Recall that the reason for all of this elaborate machinery is that I/O activities
are much slower than computation, and therefore the processor in a uniprogramming
system is idle most of the time. But the arrangement of Figure 3.8b does not entirely
solve the problem. It is true that, in this case, memory holds multiple processes and
the processor can move to another process when one process is blocked. But the
processor is so much faster than I/O that it will be common for all of the processes in
memory to be waiting for I/O. Thus, even with multiprogramming, a processor could
be idle most of the time.
What to do? Main memory could be expanded to accommodate more processes. But there are two flaws in this approach. First, there is a cost associated with
main memory, which, though small on a per-byte basis, begins to add up as we get into
the gigabytes of storage. Second, the appetite of programs for memory has grown as
fast as the cost of memory has dropped. So larger memory results in larger processes,
not more processes.
Another solution is swapping, which involves moving part or all of a process from
main memory to disk. When none of the processes in main memory is in the Ready state,
the OS swaps one of the blocked processes out on to disk into a suspend queue. This is a
queue of existing processes that have been temporarily kicked out of main memory, or
suspended. The OS then brings in another process from the suspend queue or it honors
a new-process request. Execution then continues with the newly arrived process.
Swapping, however, is an I/O operation, and therefore there is the potential for
making the problem worse, not better. But because disk I/O is generally the fastest
I/O on a system (e.g., compared to tape or printer I/O), swapping will usually enhance
performance.
With the use of swapping as just described, one other state must be added to
our process behavior model (see Figure 3.9a): the Suspend state. When all of the processes in main memory are in the Blocked state, the OS can suspend one process by
putting it in the Suspend state and transferring it to disk. The space that is freed in
main memory can then be used to bring in another process.
When the OS has performed a swapping-out operation, it has two choices for
selecting a process to bring into main memory: It can admit a newly created process,
or it can bring in a previously suspended process. It would appear that the preference
should be to bring in a previously suspended process, to provide it with service rather
than increasing the total load on the system.
But this line of reasoning presents a difficulty. All of the processes that have
been suspended were in the Blocked state at the time of suspension. It clearly would
not do any good to bring a blocked process back into main memory, because it is still
not ready for execution. Recognize, however, that each process in the Suspend state
was originally blocked on a particular event. When that event occurs, the process is
not blocked and is potentially available for execution.
Therefore, we need to rethink this aspect of the design. There are two independent concepts here: whether a process is waiting on an event (blocked or not), and
whether a process has been swapped out of main memory (suspended or not). To
accommodate this 2 * 2 combination, we need four states:
1. Ready: The process is in main memory and available for execution.
2. Blocked: The process is in main memory and awaiting an event.

M03_STAL4290_09_GE_C03.indd 144

5/9/17 4:38 PM

3.2 / PROCESS STATES   145
Dispatch

Admit

New

Ready

Running

Release

Exit

Suspend

Suspend

tw
ai
t
Ev
en

Event
occurs

A

ct
iv
at
e

Time-out

Blocked

(a) With one Suspend state

New

t

Ad

mi

mi

t

Ad
nd

Activate

Dispatch
Ready

Suspend

Running

Release

Exit

Time-out

Blocked/
Suspend

tw
ai
Ev
en

Event
occurs

Event
occurs

t

Ready/
Suspend

Suspe

Activate
Blocked
Suspend
(b) With two Suspend states

Figure 3.9

Process State Transition Diagram with Suspend States

3. Blocked/Suspend: The process is in secondary memory and awaiting an event.
4. Ready/Suspend: The process is in secondary memory but is available for execution as soon as it is loaded into main memory.
Before looking at a state transition diagram that encompasses the two new suspend states, one other point should be mentioned. The discussion so far has assumed
that virtual memory is not in use, and that a process is either all in main memory
or all out of main memory. With a virtual memory scheme, it is possible to execute
a process that is only partially in main memory. If reference is made to a process
address that is not in main memory, then the appropriate portion of the process can
be brought in. The use of virtual memory would appear to eliminate the need for
explicit swapping, because any desired address in any desired process can be moved

M03_STAL4290_09_GE_C03.indd 145

5/9/17 4:38 PM

146   Chapter 3 / Process Description and Control
in or out of main memory by the memory management hardware of the processor.
However, as we shall see in Chapter 8, the performance of a virtual memory system
can collapse if there is a sufficiently large number of active processes, all of which
are partially in main memory. Therefore, even in a virtual memory system, the OS
will need to swap out processes explicitly and completely from time to time in the
interests of performance.
Let us look now, in Figure 3.9b, at the state transition model that we have developed. (The dashed lines in the figure indicate possible but not necessary transitions.)
Important new transitions are the following:
• Blocked u Blocked/Suspend: If there are no ready processes, then at least one
blocked process is swapped out to make room for another process that is not
blocked. This transition can be made even if there are ready processes available.
In particular, if the OS determines that the currently running process, or a ready
process that it would like to dispatch, requires more main memory to maintain
adequate performance, a blocked process will be suspended.
• Blocked/Suspend u Ready/Suspend: A process in the Blocked/Suspend state
is moved to the Ready/Suspend state when the event for which it has been waiting occurs. Note this requires that the state information concerning suspended
processes must be accessible to the OS.
• Ready/Suspend u Ready: When there are no ready processes in main memory, the OS will need to bring one in to continue execution. In addition, it
might be the case that a process in the Ready/Suspend state has higher priority
than any of the processes in the Ready state. In that case, the OS designer may
dictate that it is more important to get at the higher-priority process than to
minimize swapping.
• Ready u Ready/Suspend: Normally, the OS would prefer to suspend a
blocked process rather than a ready one, because the ready process can now
be executed, whereas the blocked process is taking up main memory space and
cannot be executed. However, it may be necessary to suspend a ready process if
that is the only way to free up a sufficiently large block of main memory. Also,
the OS may choose to suspend a lower–priority ready process rather than a
higher–priority blocked process if it believes that the blocked process will be
ready soon.
Several other transitions that are worth considering are the following:
• New u Ready/Suspend and New u Ready: When a new process is created, it
can either be added to the Ready queue or the Ready/Suspend queue. In either
case, the OS must create a process control block and allocate an address space
to the process. It might be preferable for the OS to perform these housekeeping duties at an early time, so it can maintain a large pool of processes that are
not blocked. With this strategy, there would often be insufficient room in main
memory for a new process; hence the use of the (New S Ready/Suspend)
transition. On the other hand, we could argue that a just-in-time philosophy
of creating processes as late as possible reduces OS overhead, and allows that
OS to perform the process creation duties at a time when the system is clogged
with blocked processes anyway.

M03_STAL4290_09_GE_C03.indd 146

5/9/17 4:38 PM

3.2 / PROCESS STATES   147

• Blocked/Suspend u Blocked: Inclusion of this transition may seem to be poor
design. After all, if a process is not ready to execute and is not already in main
memory, what is the point of bringing it in? But consider the following scenario:
A process terminates, freeing up some main memory. There is a process in the
(Blocked/Suspend) queue with a higher priority than any of the processes in
the (Ready/Suspend) queue and the OS has reason to believe that the blocking event for that process will occur soon. Under these circumstances, it would
seem reasonable to bring a blocked process into main memory in preference
to a ready process.
• Running u Ready/Suspend: Normally, a running process is moved to the
Ready state when its time allocation expires. If, however, the OS is preempting
the process because a higher-priority process on the Blocked/Suspend queue
has just become unblocked, the OS could move the running process directly to
the (Ready/Suspend) queue and free some main memory.
• Any State u Exit: Typically, a process terminates while it is running, either
because it has completed or because of some fatal fault condition. However, in
some operating systems, a process may be terminated by the process that created it or when the parent process is itself terminated. If this is allowed, then a
process in any state can be moved to the Exit state.
Other Uses of Suspension So far, we have equated the concept of a suspended
process with that of a process that is not in main memory. A process that is not in
main memory is not immediately available for execution, whether or not it is awaiting
an event.
We can generalize the concept of a suspended process. Let us define a suspended process as having the following characteristics:
1. The process is not immediately available for execution.
2. The process may or may not be waiting on an event. If it is, this blocked condition is independent of the suspend condition, and occurrence of the blocking
event does not enable the process to be executed immediately.
3. The process was placed in a suspended state by an agent: either itself, a parent
process, or the OS, for the purpose of preventing its execution.
4. The process may not be removed from this state until the agent explicitly orders
the removal.
Table 3.3 lists some reasons for the suspension of a process. One reason we
have discussed is to provide memory space either to bring in a Ready/Suspended
process or to increase the memory allocated to other Ready processes. The OS may
have other motivations for suspending a process. For example, an auditing or tracing process may be employed to monitor activity on the system; the process may
be used to record the level of utilization of various resources (processor, memory,
channels) and the rate of progress of the user processes in the system. The OS,
under operator control, may turn this process on and off from time to time. If the
OS detects or suspects a problem, it may suspend a process. One example of this
is deadlock, which will be discussed in Chapter 6. As another example, a problem

M03_STAL4290_09_GE_C03.indd 147

5/9/17 4:38 PM

148   Chapter 3 / Process Description and Control
Table 3.3

Reasons for Process Suspension

Swapping

The OS needs to release sufficient main memory to bring in a process that is
ready to execute.

Other OS reason

The OS may suspend a background or utility process or a process that is suspected of causing a problem.

Interactive user request

A user may wish to suspend execution of a program for purposes of debugging or
in connection with the use of a resource.

Timing

A process may be executed periodically (e.g., an accounting or system monitoring
process) and may be suspended while waiting for the next time interval.

Parent process request

A parent process may wish to suspend execution of a descendent to examine or modify the suspended process, or to coordinate the activity of various
descendants.

is detected on a communications line, and the operator has the OS suspend the
process that is using the line while some tests are run.
Another set of reasons concerns the actions of an interactive user. For example,
if a user suspects a bug in the program, he or she may debug the program by suspending its execution, examining and modifying the program or data, and resuming
execution. Or there may be a background process that is collecting trace or accounting statistics, which the user may wish to be able to turn on and off.
Timing considerations may also lead to a swapping decision. For example, if a
process is to be activated periodically but is idle most of the time, then it should be
swapped out between uses. A program that monitors utilization or user activity is an
example.
Finally, a parent process may wish to suspend a descendant process. For example, process A may spawn process B to perform a file read. Subsequently, process B
encounters an error in the file read procedure and reports this to process A. Process
A suspends process B to investigate the cause.
In all of these cases, the activation of a suspended process is requested by the
agent that initially requested the suspension.

3.3 PROCESS DESCRIPTION
The OS controls events within the computer system. It schedules and dispatches processes for execution by the processor, allocates resources to processes, and responds
to requests by user processes for basic services. Fundamentally, we can think of the
OS as that entity that manages the use of system resources by processes.
This concept is illustrated in Figure 3.10. In a multiprogramming environment,
there are a number of processes (P1, c , Pn) that have been created and exist in
virtual memory. Each process, during the course of its execution, needs access to
certain system resources, including the processor, I/O devices, and main memory. In
the figure, process P1 is running; at least part of the process is in main memory, and
it has control of two I/O devices. Process P2 is also in main memory, but is blocked
waiting for an I/O device allocated to P1. Process Pn has been swapped out and is
therefore suspended.

M03_STAL4290_09_GE_C03.indd 148

5/9/17 4:38 PM

3.3 / PROCESS DESCRIPTION   149

P1

P2

Pn
Virtual
memory

Processor

Figure 3.10

I/O

I/O

I/O

Main
memory

Computer
resources

Processes and Resources (resource allocation at one snapshot in time)

We will explore the details of the management of these resources by the OS
on behalf of the processes in later chapters. Here we are concerned with a more
fundamental question: What information does the OS need to control processes and
manage resources for them?

Operating System Control Structures
If the OS is to manage processes and resources, it must have information about the
current status of each process and resource. The universal approach to providing this
information is straightforward: The OS constructs and maintains tables of information about each entity that it is managing. A general idea of the scope of this effort
is indicated in Figure 3.11, which shows four different types of tables maintained by
the OS: memory, I/O, file, and process. Although the details will differ from one OS
to another, fundamentally, all operating systems maintain information in these four
categories.
Memory tables are used to keep track of both main (real) and secondary (virtual) memory. Some of main memory is reserved for use by the OS; the remainder is
available for use by processes. Processes are maintained on secondary memory using
some sort of virtual memory or simple swapping mechanism. The memory tables
must include the following information:
• The allocation of main memory to processes
• The allocation of secondary memory to processes
• Any protection attributes of blocks of main or virtual memory, such as which
processes may access certain shared memory regions
• Any information needed to manage virtual memory
We will examine the information structures for memory management in detail
in Part Three.
I/O tables are used by the OS to manage the I/O devices and channels of the
computer system. At any given time, an I/O device may be available or assigned to a
particular process. If an I/O operation is in progress, the OS needs to know the status
of the I/O operation and the location in main memory being used as the source or
destination of the I/O transfer. I/O management will be examined in Chapter 11.
The OS may also maintain file tables. These tables provide information about
the existence of files, their location on secondary memory, their current status, and

M03_STAL4290_09_GE_C03.indd 149

5/9/17 4:38 PM

150   Chapter 3 / Process Description and Control

Memory tables

Process
1

Memory
Devices

Process
image

I/O tables

Files
Processes

File tables

Primary process table
Process 1
Process 2
Process 3

Process
image
Process
n

Process n

Figure 3.11

General Structure of Operating System Control Tables

other attributes. Much, if not all, of this information may be maintained and used by
a file management system, in which case the OS has little or no knowledge of files.
In other operating systems, much of the detail of file management is managed by the
OS itself. This topic will be explored in Chapter 12.
Finally, the OS must maintain process tables to manage processes. The remainder of this section is devoted to an examination of the required process tables. Before
proceeding to this discussion, two additional points should be made. First, although
Figure 3.11 shows four distinct sets of tables, it should be clear that these tables must
be linked or cross-referenced in some fashion. Memory, I/O, and files are managed
on behalf of processes, so there must be some reference to these resources, directly
or indirectly, in the process tables. The files referred to in the file tables are accessible via an I/O device and will, at some times, be in main or virtual memory. The
tables themselves must be accessible by the OS, and therefore are subject to memory
management.
Second, how does the OS know to create the tables in the first place? Clearly,
the OS must have some knowledge of the basic environment, such as how much main
memory exists, what are the I/O devices and what are their identifiers, and so on. This is
an issue of configuration. That is, when the OS is initialized, it must have access to some
configuration data that define the basic environment, and these data must be created
outside the OS, with human assistance or by some autoconfiguration software.

M03_STAL4290_09_GE_C03.indd 150

5/9/17 4:38 PM

3.3 / PROCESS DESCRIPTION   151

Process Control Structures
Consider what the OS must know if it is to manage and control a process. First, it
must know where the process is located; second, it must know the attributes of the
process that are necessary for its management (e.g., process ID and process state).
Process Location Before we can deal with the questions of where a process is
located or what its attributes are, we need to address an even more fundamental
question: What is the physical manifestation of a process? At a minimum, a process
must include a program or set of programs to be executed. Associated with these
programs is a set of data locations for local and global variables and any defined
constants. Thus, a process will consist of at least sufficient memory to hold the
programs and data of that process. In addition, the execution of a program typically
involves a stack (see Appendix P) that is used to keep track of procedure calls and
parameter passing between procedures. Finally, each process has associated with it a
number of attributes that are used by the OS for process control. Typically, the
collection of attributes is referred to as a process control block.7 We can refer to this
collection of program, data, stack, and attributes as the process image (see Table 3.4).
The location of a process image will depend on the memory management
scheme being used. In the simplest case, the process image is maintained as a contiguous, or continuous, block of memory. This block is maintained in secondary memory,
usually disk. So that the OS can manage the process, at least a small portion of its
image must be maintained in main memory. To execute the process, the entire process
image must be loaded into main memory, or at least virtual memory. Thus, the OS
needs to know the location of each process on disk and, for each such process that is
in main memory, the location of that process in main memory. We saw a slightly more
complex variation on this scheme with the CTSS OS in Chapter 2. With CTSS, when
a process is swapped out, part of the process image may remain in main memory.
Thus, the OS must keep track of which portions of the image of each process are still
in main memory.

Table 3.4 Typical Elements of a Process Image
User Data
The modifiable part of the user space. May include program data, a user stack area, and programs that may be
modified.
User Program
The program to be executed.
Stack
Each process has one or more last-in-first-out (LIFO) stacks associated with it. A stack is used to store parameters and calling addresses for procedure and system calls.
Process Control Block
Data needed by the OS to control the process (see Table 3.5).

7

Other commonly used names for this data structure are task control block, process descriptor, and task
descriptor.

M03_STAL4290_09_GE_C03.indd 151

5/9/17 4:38 PM

152   Chapter 3 / Process Description and Control
Modern operating systems presume paging hardware that allows noncontiguous
physical memory to support partially resident processes.8 At any given time, a portion
of a process image may be in main memory, with the remainder in secondary memory.9 Therefore, process tables maintained by the OS must show the location of each
page of each process image.
Figure 3.11 depicts the structure of the location information in the following
way. There is a primary process table with one entry for each process. Each entry
contains, at least, a pointer to a process image. If the process image contains multiple blocks, this information is contained directly in the primary process table or is
available by cross-reference to entries in memory tables. Of course, this depiction is
generic; a particular OS will have its own way of organizing the location information.
Process Attributes A sophisticated multiprogramming system requires a great
deal of information about each process. As was explained, this information can be
considered to reside in a process control block. Different systems will organize this
information in different ways, and several examples of this appear at the end of this
chapter and the next. For now, let us simply explore the type of information that
might be of use to an OS without considering in any detail how that information is
organized.
Table 3.5 lists the typical categories of information required by the OS for each
process. You may be somewhat surprised at the quantity of information required.
As you gain a greater appreciation of the responsibilities of the OS, this list should
appear more reasonable.
We can group the process control block information into three general
categories:
1. Process identification
2. Processor state information
3. Process control information
With respect to process identification, in virtually all operating systems, each
process is assigned a unique numeric identifier, which may simply be an index into
the primary process table (see Figure 3.11); otherwise there must be a mapping
that allows the OS to locate the appropriate tables based on the process identifier.
This identifier is useful in several ways. Many of the other tables controlled by the
OS may use process identifiers to cross-reference process tables. For example, the
memory tables may be organized so as to provide a map of main memory with
an indication of which process is assigned to each region. Similar references will
appear in I/O and file tables. When processes communicate with one another, the

8

A brief overview of the concepts of pages, segments, and virtual memory is provided in the subsection
on memory management in Section 2.3.
9
This brief discussion slides over some details. In particular, in a system that uses virtual memory, all of
the process image for an active process is always in secondary memory. When a portion of the image is
loaded into main memory, it is copied rather than moved. Thus, the secondary memory retains a copy of
all segments and/or pages. However, if the main memory portion of the image is modified, the secondary
copy will be out of date until the main memory portion is copied back onto disk.

M03_STAL4290_09_GE_C03.indd 152

5/9/17 4:38 PM

3.3 / PROCESS DESCRIPTION   153
Table 3.5 Typical Elements of a Process Control Block
Process Identification
Identifiers
Numeric identifiers that may be stored with the process control block include
• Identifier of this process.
• Identifier of the process that created this process (parent process).
• User identifier.
Processor State Information
User-Visible Registers
A user-visible register is one that may be referenced by means of the machine language that the processor
executes while in user mode. Typically, there are from 8 to 32 of these registers, although some RISC implementations have over 100.
Control and Status Registers
These are a variety of processor registers that are employed to control the operation of the processor. These
include:
• Program counter: Contains the address of the next instruction to be fetched.
• Condition codes: Result of the most recent arithmetic or logical operation (e.g., sign, zero, carry, equal,
overflow).
• Status information: Includes interrupt enabled/disabled flags, execution mode.
Stack Pointers
Each process has one or more last-in-first-out (LIFO) system stacks associated with it. A stack is used to store
parameters and calling addresses for procedure and system calls. The stack pointer points to the top of the
stack.
Process Control Information
Scheduling and State Information
This is information that is needed by the operating system to perform its scheduling function. Typical items of
information include:
• Process state: Defines the readiness of the process to be scheduled for execution (e.g., running, ready, waiting, halted).
• Priority: One or more fields may be used to describe the scheduling priority of the process. In some systems,
several values are required (e.g., default, current, highest allowable).
• Scheduling-related information: This will depend on the scheduling algorithm used. Examples are the
amount of time that the process has been waiting and the amount of time that the process executed the last
time it was running.
• Event: Identity of event the process is awaiting before it can be resumed.
Data Structuring
A process may be linked to other process in a queue, ring, or some other structure. For example, all processes
in a waiting state for a particular priority level may be linked in a queue. A process may exhibit a parent–child
(creator–created) relationship with another process. The process control block may contain pointers to other
processes to support these structures.
Interprocess Communication
Various flags, signals, and messages may be associated with communication between two independent processes. Some or all of this information may be maintained in the process control block.
Process Privileges
Processes are granted privileges in terms of the memory that may be accessed and the types of instructions
that may be executed. In addition, privileges may apply to the use of system utilities and services.
Memory Management
This section may include pointers to segment and/or page tables that describe the virtual memory assigned to
this process.
Resource Ownership and Utilization
Resources controlled by the process may be indicated, such as opened files. A history of utilization of the processor or other resources may also be included; this information may be needed by the scheduler.

M03_STAL4290_09_GE_C03.indd 153

5/9/17 4:38 PM

154   Chapter 3 / Process Description and Control
process identifier informs the OS of the destination of a particular communication.
When processes are allowed to create other processes, identifiers indicate the parent and descendants of each process.
In addition to these process identifiers, a process may be assigned a user identifier that indicates the user responsible for the job.
Processor state information consists of the contents of processor registers.
While a process is running, of course, the information is in the registers. When a process is interrupted, all of this register information must be saved so it can be restored
when the process resumes execution. The nature and number of registers involved
depend on the design of the processor. Typically, the register set will include uservisible registers, control and status registers, and stack pointers. These are described
in Chapter 1.
Of particular note, all processor designs include a register or set of registers,
often known as the program status word (PSW), that contains status information.
The PSW typically contains condition codes plus other status information. A good
example of a processor status word is that on Intel x86 processors, referred to as the
EFLAGS register (shown in Figure 3.12 and Table 3.6). This structure is used by any
OS (including UNIX and Windows) running on an x86 processor.
The third major category of information in the process control block can be
called, for want of a better name, process control information. This is the additional
information needed by the OS to control and coordinate the various active processes.
The last part of Table 3.5 indicates the scope of this information. As we examine the
details of operating system functionality in succeeding chapters, the need for the
various items on this list should become clear.
Figure 3.13 suggests the structure of process images in virtual memory. Each process image consists of a process control block, a user stack, the private address space of
the process, and any other address space that the process shares with other processes. In

31 30 29 28 27 26 25 24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0

V V
I
A V R
N
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
I I
0
D
C M F
T
P F
X ID =
X VIP =
X VIF =
X AC =
X VM =
X RF =
X NT =
X IOPL =
S OF =

Identification flag
Virtual interrupt pending
Virtual interrupt flag
Alignment check
Virtual 8086 mode
Resume flag
Nested task flag
I/O privilege level
Overflow flag

I
O
P
L

O D I T S Z
A
P
C
0
0
1
F F F F F F
F
F
F

C DF = Direction flag
X IF = Interrupt enable flag
X TF = Trap flag
S SF = Sign flag
S ZF = Zero flag
S AF = Auxiliary carry flag
S PF = Parity flag
S CF = Carry flag

S Indicates a Status Flag
C Indicates a Control Flag
X Indicates a System Flag
Shaded bits are reserved

Figure 3.12

M03_STAL4290_09_GE_C03.indd 154

x86 EFLAGS Register

5/9/17 4:38 PM

3.3 / PROCESS DESCRIPTION   155
Table 3.6

x86 EFLAGS Register Bits
Status Flags (condition codes)

AF (Auxiliary carry flag)
Represents carrying or borrowing between half-bytes of an 8-bit arithmetic or logic operation using the AL
register.
CF (Carry flag)
Indicates carrying out or borrowing into the leftmost bit position following an arithmetic operation; also modified by some of the shift and rotate operations.
OF (Overflow flag)
Indicates an arithmetic overflow after an addition or subtraction.
PF (Parity flag)
Parity of the result of an arithmetic or logic operation. 1 indicates even parity; 0 indicates odd parity.
SF (Sign flag)
Indicates the sign of the result of an arithmetic or logic operation.
ZF (Zero flag)
Indicates that the result of an arithmetic or logic operation is 0.
Control Flag
DF (Direction flag)
Determines whether string processing instructions increment or decrement the 16-bit half-registers SI and DI
(for 16-bit operations) or the 32-bit registers ESI and EDI (for 32-bit operations).
System Flags (should not be modified by application programs)
AC (Alignment check)
Set if a word or doubleword is addressed on a nonword or nondoubleword boundary.
ID (Identification flag)
If this bit can be set and cleared, this processor supports the CPUID instruction. This instruction provides
information about the vendor, family, and model.
RF (Resume flag)
Allows the programmer to disable debug exceptions so the instruction can be restarted after a debug
­exception without immediately causing another debug exception.
IOPL (I/O privilege level)
When set, it causes the processor to generate an exception on all accesses to I/O devices during protected
mode operation.
IF (Interrupt enable flag)
When set, the processor will recognize external interrupts.
TF (Trap flag)
When set, it causes an interrupt after the execution of each instruction. This is used for debugging.
NT (Nested task flag)
Indicates that the current task is nested within another task in protected mode operation.
VM (Virtual 8086 mode)
Allows the programmer to enable or disable virtual 8086 mode, which determines whether the processor runs
as an 8086 machine.
VIP (Virtual interrupt pending)
Used in virtual 8086 mode to indicate that one or more interrupts are awaiting service.
VIF (Virtual interrupt flag)
Used in virtual 8086 mode instead of IF.

M03_STAL4290_09_GE_C03.indd 155

5/9/17 4:38 PM

156   Chapter 3 / Process Description and Control
Process
identification

Process
identification

Process
identification

Processor state
information

Processor state
information

Processor state
information

Process control
information

Process control
information

Process control
information

User stack

User stack

User stack

Private user
address space
(programs, data)

Private user
address space
(programs, data)

Private user
address space
(programs, data)

Shared address
space

Shared address
space

Shared address
space

Process 1

Process 2

Process n

Figure 3.13

Process
control
block

User Processes in Virtual Memory

the figure, each process image appears as a contiguous range of addresses. In an actual
implementation, this may not be the case; it will depend on the memory management
scheme and the way in which control structures are organized by the OS.
As indicated in Table 3.5, the process control block may contain structuring
information, including pointers that allow the linking of process control blocks.
Thus, the queues that were described in the preceding section could be implemented
as linked lists of process control blocks. For example, the queueing structure of
­Figure 3.8a could be implemented as suggested in Figure 3.14.
The Role of the Process Control Block The process control block is the
most important data structure in an OS. Each process control block contains all of
the information about a process that is needed by the OS. The blocks are read and/or
modified by virtually every module in the OS, including those involved with scheduling,
resource allocation, interrupt processing, and performance monitoring and analysis. One
can say that the set of process control blocks defines the state of the OS.
This brings up an important design issue. A number of routines within the OS
will need access to information in process control blocks. The provision of direct
access to these tables is not difficult. Each process is equipped with a unique ID, and
this can be used as an index into a table of pointers to the process control blocks.
The difficulty is not access but rather protection. Two problems present themselves:
• A bug in a single routine, such as an interrupt handler, could damage process
control blocks, which could destroy the system’s ability to manage the affected
processes.

M03_STAL4290_09_GE_C03.indd 156

5/9/17 4:38 PM

3.4 / PROCESS CONTROL   157
Process
control block
Running
Ready
Blocked

Figure 3.14 Process List Structures

• A design change in the structure or semantics of the process control block could
affect a number of modules in the OS.
These problems can be addressed by requiring all routines in the OS to go
through a handler routine, the only job of which is to protect process control blocks,
and which is the sole arbiter for reading and writing these blocks. The trade-off in
the use of such a routine involves performance issues and the degree to which the
remainder of the system software can be trusted to be correct.

3.4 PROCESS CONTROL
Modes of Execution
Before continuing with our discussion of the way in which the OS manages processes,
we need to distinguish between the mode of processor execution normally associated
with the OS and that normally associated with user programs. Most processors support at least two modes of execution. Certain instructions can only be executed in
the more-privileged mode. These would include reading or altering a control register,
such as the PSW, primitive I/O instructions, and instructions that relate to memory
management. In addition, certain regions of memory can only be accessed in the
more-privileged mode.

M03_STAL4290_09_GE_C03.indd 157

5/9/17 4:38 PM

158   Chapter 3 / Process Description and Control
Table 3.7 Typical Functions of an Operating System Kernel
Process Management
• Process creation and termination
• Process scheduling and dispatching
• Process switching
• Process synchronization and support for interprocess communication
• Management of process control blocks
Memory Management
• Allocation of address space to processes
• Swapping
• Page and segment management
I/O Management
• Buffer management
• Allocation of I/O channels and devices to processes
Support Functions
• Interrupt handling
• Accounting
• Monitoring

The less-privileged mode is often referred to as the user mode, because
user programs typically would execute in this mode. The more-privileged mode
is referred to as the system mode, control mode, or kernel mode. This last term
refers to the kernel of the OS, which is that portion of the OS that encompasses
the important system functions. Table 3.7 lists the functions typically found in the
kernel of an OS.
The reason for using two modes should be clear. It is necessary to protect the
OS and key operating system tables, such as process control blocks, from interference by user programs. In the kernel mode, the software has complete control of the
processor and all its instructions, registers, and memory. This level of control is not
necessary, and for safety is not desirable for user programs.
Two questions arise: How does the processor know in which mode it is to be
executing, and how is the mode changed? Regarding the first question, typically
there is a bit in the PSW that indicates the mode of execution. This bit is changed
in response to certain events. Typically, when a user makes a call to an operating
system service or when an interrupt triggers execution of an operating system
routine, the mode is set to the kernel mode and, upon return from the service to
the user process, the mode is set to user mode. As an example, consider the Intel
Itanium processor, which implements the 64-bit IA-64 architecture. The processor
has a processor status register (psr) that includes a 2-bit cpl (current privilege
level) field. Level 0 is the most privileged level, while level 3 is the least privileged
level. Most operating systems, such as Linux, use level 0 for the kernel and one
other level for user mode. When an interrupt occurs, the processor clears most
of the bits in the psr, including the cpl field. This automatically sets the cpl to

M03_STAL4290_09_GE_C03.indd 158

5/9/17 4:38 PM

3.4 / PROCESS CONTROL   159

level 0. At the end of the interrupt-handling routine, the final instruction that is
executed is irt (interrupt return). This instruction causes the processor to restore
the psr of the interrupted program, which restores the privilege level of that program. A similar sequence occurs when an application places a system call. For the
Itanium, an application places a system call by placing the system call identifier and
the system call arguments in a predefined area, then executing a special instruction that has the effect of interrupting execution at the user level and transferring
control to the kernel.

Process Creation
In Section 3.2, we discussed the events that lead to the creation of a new process. Having discussed the data structures associated with a process, we are now in a position
to describe briefly the steps involved in actually creating the process.
Once the OS decides, for whatever reason (see Table 3.1), to create a new process, it can proceed as follows:
1. Assign a unique process identifier to the new process. At this time, a new entry
is added to the primary process table, which contains one entry per process.
2. Allocate space for the process. This includes all elements of the process image.
Thus, the OS must know how much space is needed for the private user address
space (programs and data) and the user stack. These values can be assigned by
default based on the type of process, or they can be set based on user request
at job creation time. If a process is spawned by another process, the parent
process can pass the needed values to the OS as part of the process creation
request. If any existing address space is to be shared by this new process, the
appropriate linkages must be set up. Finally, space for a process control block
must be allocated.
3. Initialize the process control block. The process identification portion contains
the ID of this process plus other appropriate IDs, such as that of the parent
process. The processor state information portion will typically be initialized
with most entries zero, except for the program counter (set to the program entry
point) and system stack pointers (set to define the process stack boundaries).
The process control information portion is initialized based on standard default
values plus attributes that have been requested for this process. For example,
the process state would typically be initialized to Ready or Ready/Suspend. The
priority may be set by default to the lowest priority unless an explicit request
is made for a higher priority. Initially, the process may own no resources (I/O
devices, files) unless there is an explicit request for these, or unless they are
inherited from the parent.
4. Set the appropriate linkages. For example, if the OS maintains each scheduling
queue as a linked list, then the new process must be put in the Ready or Ready/
Suspend list.
5. Create or expand other data structures. For example, the OS may maintain
an accounting file on each process to be used subsequently for billing and/or
performance assessment purposes.

M03_STAL4290_09_GE_C03.indd 159

5/9/17 4:38 PM

160   Chapter 3 / Process Description and Control
Process Switching
On the face of it, the function of process switching would seem to be straightforward.
At some time, a running process is interrupted, and the OS assigns another process
to the Running state and turns control over to that process. However, several design
issues are raised. First, what events trigger a process switch? Another issue is that we
must recognize the distinction between mode switching and process switching. Finally,
what must the OS do to the various data structures under its control to achieve a
process switch?
When to Switch Processes A process switch may occur any time that the OS has
gained control from the currently running process. Table 3.8 suggests the possible
events that may give control to the OS.
First, let us consider system interrupts. Actually, we can distinguish, as many
systems do, two kinds of system interrupts, one of which is simply referred to as an
interrupt, and the other as a trap. The former is due to some sort of event that is
external to and independent of the currently running process, such as the completion
of an I/O operation. The latter relates to an error or exception condition generated
within the currently running process, such as an illegal file access attempt. With an
ordinary interrupt, control is first transferred to an interrupt handler, which does
some basic housekeeping and then branches to an OS routine that is concerned with
the particular type of interrupt that has occurred. Examples include the following:
• Clock interrupt: The OS determines whether the currently running process has
been executing for the maximum allowable unit of time, referred to as a time
slice. That is, a time slice is the maximum amount of time that a process can
execute before being interrupted. If so, this process must be switched to a Ready
state and another process dispatched.
• I/O interrupt: The OS determines what I/O action has occurred. If the I/O
action constitutes an event for which one or more processes are waiting, then
the OS moves all of the corresponding blocked processes to the Ready state
(and Blocked/Suspend processes to the Ready/Suspend state). The OS must
then decide whether to resume execution of the process currently in the Running state, or to preempt that process for a higher-priority Ready process.
• Memory fault: The processor encounters a virtual memory address reference
for a word that is not in main memory. The OS must bring in the block (page
or segment) of memory containing the reference from secondary memory

Table 3.8

Mechanisms for Interrupting the Execution of a Process

Mechanism

Cause

Use

Interrupt

External to the execution of the current instruction

Reaction to an asynchronous external
event

Trap

Associated with the execution of the
current instruction

Handling of an error or an exception
condition

Supervisor call

Explicit request

Call to an operating system function

M03_STAL4290_09_GE_C03.indd 160

5/9/17 4:38 PM

3.4 / PROCESS CONTROL   161

to main memory. After the I/O request is issued to bring in the block of
memory, the process with the memory fault is placed in a blocked state; the
OS then performs a process switch to resume execution of another process.
After the desired block is brought into memory, that process is placed in
the Ready state.
With a trap, the OS determines if the error or exception condition is fatal. If so,
then the currently running process is moved to the Exit state and a process switch
occurs. If not, then the action of the OS will depend on the nature of the error and the
design of the OS. It may attempt some recovery procedure or simply notify the user.
It may perform a process switch or resume the currently running process.
Finally, the OS may be activated by a supervisor call from the program being
executed. For example, a user process is running and an instruction is executed that
requests an I/O operation, such as a file open. This call results in a transfer to a routine
that is part of the operating system code. The use of a system call may place the user
process in the Blocked state.
Mode Switching In Chapter 1, we discussed the inclusion of an interrupt stage as
part of the instruction cycle. Recall that, in the interrupt stage, the processor checks
to see if any interrupts are pending, indicated by the presence of an interrupt signal.
If no interrupts are pending, the processor proceeds to the fetch stage and fetches
the next instruction of the current program in the current process. If an interrupt is
pending, the processor does the following:
1. It sets the program counter to the starting address of an interrupt-handler
program.
2. It switches from user mode to kernel mode so the interrupt processing code
may include privileged instructions.
The processor now proceeds to the fetch stage and fetches the first instruction of the
interrupt-handler program, which will service the interrupt. At this point, typically,
the context of the process that has been interrupted is saved into that process control
block of the interrupted program.
One question that may now occur to you is, What constitutes the context that is
saved? The answer is that it must include any information that may be altered by the
execution of the interrupt handler, and that will be needed to resume the program
that was interrupted. Thus, the portion of the process control block that was referred
to as processor state information must be saved. This includes the program counter,
other processor registers, and stack information.
Does anything else need to be done? That depends on what happens next. The
interrupt handler is typically a short program that performs a few basic tasks related
to an interrupt. For example, it resets the flag or indicator that signals the presence of
an interrupt. It may send an acknowledgment to the entity that issued the interrupt,
such as an I/O module. And it may do some basic housekeeping relating to the effects
of the event that caused the interrupt. For example, if the interrupt relates to an I/O
event, the interrupt handler will check for an error condition. If an error has occurred,
the interrupt handler may send a signal to the process that originally requested the
I/O operation. If the interrupt is by the clock, then the handler will hand control over

M03_STAL4290_09_GE_C03.indd 161

5/9/17 4:38 PM

162   Chapter 3 / Process Description and Control
to the dispatcher, which will want to pass control to another process because the time
slice allotted to the currently running process has expired.
What about the other information in the process control block? If this interrupt is to be followed by a switch to another process, then some work will need
to be done. However, in most operating systems, the occurrence of an interrupt
does not necessarily mean a process switch. It is possible that, after the interrupt
handler has executed, the currently running process will resume execution. In that
case, all that is necessary is to save the processor state information when the interrupt occurs and restore that information when control is returned to the program
that was running. Typically, the saving and restoring functions are performed in
hardware.
Change of Process State It is clear, then, that the mode switch is a concept
distinct from that of the process switch.10 A mode switch may occur without changing
the state of the process that is currently in the Running state. In that case, the context
saving and subsequent restoral involve little overhead. However, if the currently
running process is to be moved to another state (Ready, Blocked, etc.), then the OS
must make substantial changes in its environment. The steps involved in a full process
switch are as follows:
1. Save the context of the processor, including program counter and other
registers.
2. Update the process control block of the process that is currently in the Running
state. This includes changing the state of the process to one of the other states
(Ready; Blocked; Ready/Suspend; or Exit). Other relevant fields must also be
updated, including the reason for leaving the Running state and accounting
information.
3. Move the process control block of this process to the appropriate queue (Ready;
Blocked on Event i; Ready/Suspend).
4. Select another process for execution; this topic will be explored in Part Four.
5. Update the process control block of the process selected. This includes changing
the state of this process to Running.
6. Update memory management data structures. This may be required, depending
on how address translation is managed; this topic will be explored in Part Three.
7. Restore the context of the processor to that which existed at the time the
selected process was last switched out of the Running state, by loading in the
previous values of the program counter and other registers.
Thus, the process switch, which involves a state change, requires more effort than a
mode switch.

10

The term context switch is often found in OS literature and textbooks. Unfortunately, although most of
the literature uses this term to mean what is here called a process switch, other sources use it to mean a
mode switch or even a thread switch (defined in the next chapter). To avoid ambiguity, the term is not
used in this book.

M03_STAL4290_09_GE_C03.indd 162

5/9/17 4:38 PM

3.5 / EXECUTION OF THE OPERATING SYSTEM   163

3.5 EXECUTION OF THE OPERATING SYSTEM
In Chapter 2, we pointed out two intriguing facts about operating systems:
• The OS functions in the same way as ordinary computer software, in the sense
that the OS is a set of programs executed by the processor.
• The OS frequently relinquishes control and depends on the processor to restore
control to the OS.
If the OS is just a collection of programs, and if it is executed by the processor just like any other program, is the OS a process? If so, how is it controlled?
These interesting questions have inspired a number of design approaches. Figure 3.15
illustrates a range of approaches that are found in various contemporary operating
systems.

Nonprocess Kernel
One traditional approach, common on many older operating systems, is to execute
the kernel of the OS outside of any process (see Figure 3.15a). With this approach,
when the currently running process is interrupted or issues a supervisor call, the
mode context of this process is saved and control is passed to the kernel. The OS has
its own region of memory to use and its own system stack for controlling procedure
calls and returns. The OS can perform any desired functions and restore the context

P1

P2

Pn
Kernel

(a) Separate kernel

P1

P2

Pn

OS
functions

OS
functions

OS
functions

Process-switching functions
(b) OS functions execute within user processes

P1

P2

Pn

OS1

OSk

Process-switching functions
(c) OS functions execute as separate processes

Figure 3.15 Relationship between Operating System
and User Processes

M03_STAL4290_09_GE_C03.indd 163

5/9/17 4:38 PM

164   Chapter 3 / Process Description and Control
of the interrupted process, which causes execution to resume in the interrupted user
process. Alternatively, the OS can complete the function of saving the environment of
the process and proceed to schedule and dispatch another process. Whether this happens depends on the reason for the interruption and the circumstances at the time.
In any case, the key point here is that the concept of process is considered to
apply only to user programs. The operating system code is executed as a separate
entity that operates in privileged mode.

Execution within User Processes
An alternative that is common with operating systems on smaller computers (PCs,
workstations) is to execute virtually all OS software in the context of a user process.
The view is that the OS is primarily a collection of routines the user calls to perform
various functions, executed within the environment of the user’s process. This is illustrated in Figure 3.15b. At any given point, the OS is managing n process images. Each
image includes not only the regions illustrated in Figure 3.13 but also program, data,
and stack areas for kernel programs.
Figure 3.16 suggests a typical process image structure for this strategy. A separate kernel stack is used to manage calls/returns while the process is in kernel mode.
Process
identification
Processor state
information

Process control
block

Process control
information

User stack

Private user
address space
(programs, data)

Kernel stack

Shared address
space

Figure 3.16 Process Image: Operating
System Executes within
User Space

M03_STAL4290_09_GE_C03.indd 164

5/9/17 4:38 PM

3.5 / EXECUTION OF THE OPERATING SYSTEM   165

Operating system code and data are in the shared address space and are shared by
all user processes.
When an interrupt, trap, or supervisor call occurs, the processor is placed in
kernel mode and control is passed to the OS. To pass control from a user program
to the OS, the mode context is saved and a mode switch takes place to an operating
system routine. However, execution continues within the current user process. Thus,
a process switch is not performed, just a mode switch within the same process.
If the OS, upon completion of its work, determines that the current process
should continue to run, then a mode switch resumes the interrupted program within
the current process. This is one of the key advantages of this approach: A user
program has been interrupted to employ some operating system routine, and then
resumed, and all of this has occurred without incurring the penalty of two process
switches. If, however, it is determined that a process switch is to occur rather than
returning to the previously executing program, then control is passed to a processswitching routine. This routine may or may not execute in the current process,
depending on system design. At some point, however, the current process has to be
placed in a nonrunning state, and another process designated as the running process. During this phase, it is logically most convenient to view execution as taking
place outside of all processes.
In a way, this view of the OS is remarkable. Simply put, at certain points in time,
a process will save its state information, choose another process to run from among
those that are ready, and relinquish control to that process. The reason this is not an
arbitrary and indeed chaotic situation is that during the critical time, the code that
is executed in the user process is shared operating system code and not user code.
Because of the concept of user mode and kernel mode, the user cannot tamper with
or interfere with the operating system routines, even though they are executing in
the user’s process environment. This further reminds us that there is a distinction
between the concepts of process and program, and that the relationship between the
two is not one-to-one. Within a process, both a user program and operating system
programs may execute, and the operating system programs that execute in the various
user processes are identical.

Process-Based Operating System
Another alternative, illustrated in Figure 3.15c, is to implement the OS as a collection
of system processes. As in the other options, the software that is part of the kernel
executes in a kernel mode. In this case, however, major kernel functions are organized
as separate processes. Again, there may be a small amount of process-switching code
that is executed outside of any process.
This approach has several advantages. It imposes a program design discipline
that encourages the use of a modular OS with minimal, clean interfaces between the
modules. In addition, some noncritical operating system functions are conveniently
implemented as separate processes. For example, we mentioned earlier a monitor
program that records the level of utilization of various resources (processor, memory,
channels) and the rate of progress of the user processes in the system. Because this
program does not provide a particular service to any active process, it can only be
invoked by the OS. As a process, the function can run at an assigned priority level and

M03_STAL4290_09_GE_C03.indd 165

5/9/17 4:38 PM

166   Chapter 3 / Process Description and Control
be interleaved with other processes under dispatcher control. Finally, implementing
the OS as a set of processes is useful in a multiprocessor or multicomputer environment, in which some of the operating system services can be shipped out to dedicated
processors, improving performance.

3.6 UNIX SVR4 PROCESS MANAGEMENT
UNIX System V makes use of a simple but powerful process facility that is highly
visible to the user. UNIX follows the model of Figure 3.15b, in which most of the OS
executes within the environment of a user process. UNIX uses two categories of processes: system processes, and user processes. System processes run in kernel mode and
execute operating system code to perform administrative and housekeeping functions, such as allocation of memory and process swapping. User processes operate
in user mode to execute user programs and utilities, and in kernel mode to execute
instructions that belong to the kernel. A user process enters kernel mode by issuing
a system call, when an exception (fault) is generated, or when an interrupt occurs.

Process States
A total of nine process states are recognized by the UNIX SVR4 operating system;
these are listed in Table 3.9, and a state transition diagram is shown in Figure 3.17
(based on the figure in [BACH86]). This figure is similar to Figure 3.9b, with the two
UNIX sleeping states corresponding to the two blocked states. The differences are
as follows:
• UNIX employs two Running states to indicate whether the process is executing
in user mode or kernel mode.
• A distinction is made between the two states: (Ready to Run, in Memory) and
(Preempted). These are essentially the same state, as indicated by the dotted

Table 3.9

UNIX Process States

User Running

Executing in user mode.

Kernel Running

Executing in kernel mode.

Ready to Run, in
Memory

Ready to run as soon as the kernel schedules it.

Asleep in Memory

Unable to execute until an event occurs; process is in main memory (a blocked state).

Ready to Run,
Swapped

Process is ready to run, but the swapper must swap the process into main memory
before the kernel can schedule it to execute.

Sleeping, Swapped

The process is awaiting an event and has been swapped to secondary storage (a
blocked state).

Preempted

Process is returning from kernel to user mode, but the kernel preempts it and does a
process switch to schedule another process.

Created

Process is newly created and not yet ready to run.

Zombie

Process no longer exists, but it leaves a record for its parent process to collect.

M03_STAL4290_09_GE_C03.indd 166

5/9/17 4:38 PM

3.6 / UNIX SVR4 PROCESS MANAGEMENT   167
Fork

Created
Preempted
Not enough memory
(swapping system only)

Enough
memory

Return
to user
User
running

Preempt
Return

System call,
interrupt

Interrupt,
interrupt return

Reschedule
process

Swap out
Swap in

Ready to run
swapped

Kernel
running
Wakeup

Sleep

Wakeup

Exit

Zombie

Figure 3.17

Ready to run
in memory

Asleep in
memory

Swap out

Sleep,
swapped

UNIX Process State Transition Diagram

line joining them. The distinction is made to emphasize the way in which the
Preempted state is entered. When a process is running in kernel mode (as a
result of a supervisor call, clock interrupt, or I/O interrupt), there will come a
time when the kernel has completed its work and is ready to return control to
the user program. At this point, the kernel may decide to preempt the current
process in favor of one that is ready and of higher priority. In that case, the current process moves to the Preempted state. However, for purposes of dispatching, those processes in the Preempted state and those in the (Ready to Run, in
Memory) state form one queue.
Preemption can only occur when a process is about to move from kernel mode
to user mode. While a process is running in kernel mode, it may not be preempted.
This makes UNIX unsuitable for real-time processing. Chapter 10 will discuss the
requirements for real-time processing.
Two processes are unique in UNIX. Process 0 is a special process that is created
when the system boots; in effect, it is predefined as a data structure loaded at boot
time. It is the swapper process. In addition, process 0 spawns process 1, referred to as
the init process; all other processes in the system have process 1 as an ancestor. When
a new interactive user logs on to the system, it is process 1 that creates a user process

M03_STAL4290_09_GE_C03.indd 167

5/9/17 4:38 PM

168   Chapter 3 / Process Description and Control
for that user. Subsequently, the user process can create child processes in a branching tree, so any particular application can consist of a number of related processes.

Process Description
A process in UNIX is a rather complex set of data structures that provide the OS
with all of the information necessary to manage and dispatch processes. Table 3.10
summarizes the elements of the process image, which are organized into three parts:
user-level context, register context, and system-level context.
The user-level context contains the basic elements of a user’s program and can
be generated directly from a compiled object file. The user’s program is separated into
text and data areas; the text area is read-only and is intended to hold the program’s
instructions. While the process is executing, the processor uses the user stack area for
procedure calls and returns and parameter passing. The shared memory area is a data
area that is shared with other processes. There is only one physical copy of a shared
memory area, but, by the use of virtual memory, it appears to each sharing process
that the shared memory region is in its address space. When a process is not running,
the processor status information is stored in the register context area.
The system-level context contains the remaining information that the OS
needs to manage the process. It consists of a static part, which is fixed in size and

Table 3.10

UNIX Process Image
User-Level Context

Process text

Executable machine instructions of the program

Process data

Data accessible by the program of this process

User stack

Contains the arguments, local variables, and pointers for functions executing in user mode

Shared memory

Memory shared with other processes, used for interprocess communication
Register Context

Program counter

Address of next instruction to be executed; may be in kernel or user memory space of
this process

Processor status
register

Contains the hardware status at the time of preemption; contents and format are hardware dependent

Stack pointer

Points to the top of the kernel or user stack, depending on the mode of operation at the
time or preemption

General-purpose
registers

Hardware dependent
System-Level Context

Process table entry

Defines state of a process; this information is always accessible to the operating system

U (user) area

Process control information that needs to be accessed only in the context of the process

Per process region
table

Defines the mapping from virtual to physical addresses; also contains a permission
field that indicates the type of access allowed the process: read-only, read-write, or
read-execute

Kernel stack

Contains the stack frame of kernel procedures as the process executes in kernel mode

M03_STAL4290_09_GE_C03.indd 168

5/9/17 4:38 PM

3.6 / UNIX SVR4 PROCESS MANAGEMENT   169
Table 3.11

UNIX Process Table Entry

Process status

Current state of process.

Pointers

To U area and process memory area (text, data, stack).

Process size

Enables the operating system to know how much space to allocate the process.

User identifiers

The real user ID identifies the user who is responsible for the running process. The effective user ID may be used by a process to gain temporary privileges associated with a
particular program; while that program is being executed as part of the process, the process operates with the effective user ID.

Process identifiers

ID of this process; ID of parent process. These are set up when the process enters the
Created state during the fork system call.

Event descriptor

Valid when a process is in a sleeping state; when the event occurs, the process is transferred to a ready-to-run state.

Priority

Used for process scheduling.

Signal

Enumerates signals sent to a process but not yet handled.

Timers

Include process execution time, kernel resource utilization, and user-set timer used to
send alarm signal to a process.

P link

Pointer to the next link in the ready queue (valid if process is ready to execute).

Memory status

Indicates whether process image is in main memory or swapped out. If it is in memory,
this field also indicates whether it may be swapped out or is temporarily locked into
main memory.

stays with a process throughout its lifetime, and a dynamic part, which varies in
size through the life of the process. One element of the static part is the process
table entry. This is actually part of the process table maintained by the OS, with
one entry per process. The process table entry contains process control information
that is accessible to the kernel at all times; hence, in a virtual memory system, all
process table entries are maintained in main memory. Table 3.11 lists the contents
of a process table entry. The user area, or U area, contains additional process control information that is needed by the kernel when it is executing in the context of
this process; it is also used when paging processes to and from memory. Table 3.12
shows the contents of this table.
The distinction between the process table entry and the U area reflects the fact
that the UNIX kernel always executes in the context of some process. Much of the
time, the kernel will be dealing with the concerns of that process. However, some of
the time, such as when the kernel is performing a scheduling algorithm preparatory
to dispatching another process, it will need access to information about other processes. The information in a process table can be accessed when the given process is
not the current one.
The third static portion of the system-level context is the per process region
table, which is used by the memory management system. Finally, the kernel stack is
the dynamic portion of the system-level context. This stack is used when the process
is executing in kernel mode, and contains the information that must be saved and
restored as procedure calls and interrupts occur.

M03_STAL4290_09_GE_C03.indd 169

5/9/17 4:38 PM

170   Chapter 3 / Process Description and Control
Table 3.12

UNIX U Area

Process table pointer

Indicates entry that corresponds to the U area.

User identifiers

Real and effective user IDs used to determine user privileges.

Timers

Record time that the process (and its descendants) spent executing in user mode and
in kernel mode.

Signal-handler array

For each type of signal defined in the system, indicates how the process will react to
receipt of that signal (exit, ignore, execute specified user function).

Control terminal

Indicates login terminal for this process, if one exists.

Error field

Records errors encountered during a system call.

Return value

Contains the result of system calls.

I/O parameters

Describe the amount of data to transfer, the address of the source (or target) data
array in user space, and file offsets for I/O.

File parameters

Current directory and current root describe the file system environment of the
process.

User file descriptor
table

Records the files the process has opened.

Limit fields

Restrict the size of the process and the size of a file it can write.

Permission modes
fields

Mask mode settings on files the process creates.

Process Control
Process creation in UNIX is made by means of the kernel system call, fork(). When
a process issues a fork request, the OS performs the following functions [BACH86]:
1. It allocates a slot in the process table for the new process.
2. It assigns a unique process ID to the child process.
3. It makes a copy of the process image of the parent, with the exception of any
shared memory.
4. It increments counters for any files owned by the parent, to reflect that an
additional process now also owns those files.
5. It assigns the child process to the Ready to Run state.
6. It returns the ID number of the child to the parent process, and a 0 value to
the child process.
All of this work is accomplished in kernel mode in the parent process. When
the kernel has completed these functions, it can do one of the following, as part of
the dispatcher routine:
• Stay in the parent process. Control returns to user mode at the point of the fork
call of the parent.
• Transfer control to the child process. The child process begins executing at the
same point in the code as the parent, namely at the return from the fork call.
• Transfer control to another process. Both parent and child are left in the Ready
to Run state.

M03_STAL4290_09_GE_C03.indd 170

5/9/17 4:38 PM

3.8 / KEY TERMS, REVIEW QUESTIONS, AND PROBLEMS   171

It is perhaps difficult to visualize this method of process creation because both
parent and child are executing the same passage of code. The difference is this: When
the return from the fork occurs, the return parameter is tested. If the value is zero,
then this is the child process, and a branch can be executed to the appropriate user
program to continue execution. If the value is nonzero, then this is the parent process,
and the main line of execution can continue.

3.7 SUMMARY
The most fundamental concept in a modern OS is the process. The principal function
of the OS is to create, manage, and terminate processes. While processes are active,
the OS must see that each is allocated time for execution by the processor, coordinate their activities, manage conflicting demands, and allocate system resources to
processes.
To perform its process management functions, the OS maintains a description
of each process, or process image, which includes the address space within which the
process executes, and a process control block. The latter contains all of the information that is required by the OS to manage the process, including its current state,
resources allocated to it, priority, and other relevant data.
During its lifetime, a process moves among a number of states. The most important of these are Ready, Running, and Blocked. A ready process is one that is not currently executing, but that is ready to be executed as soon as the OS dispatches it. The
running process is that process that is currently being executed by the processor. In a
multiprocessor system, more than one process can be in this state. A blocked process
is waiting for the completion of some event, such as an I/O operation.
A running process is interrupted either by an interrupt, which is an event that
occurs outside the process and that is recognized by the processor, or by executing
a supervisor call to the OS. In either case, the processor performs a mode switch,
transferring control to an operating system routine. The OS, after it has completed
necessary work, may resume the interrupted process or switch to some other process.

3.8 KEY TERMS, REVIEW QUESTIONS, AND PROBLEMS
Key Terms
blocked state
child process
dispatcher
exit state
interrupt
kernel mode
mode switch
new state
parent process
preempt

M03_STAL4290_09_GE_C03.indd 171

privileged mode
process
process control block
process control information
process image
process spawning
process switch
program status word
ready state
round-robin

running state
suspend state
swapping
system mode
task
time slice
trace
trap
user mode

5/9/17 4:38 PM

